Owain Lloyd is asked about the lessons from the Welsh Government's early implementer pilot.]
Owain Lloyd: I would say that we've learned that—
Hefin David AM: That's all we need to hear for now. That's all for today. Thank you, Chair. This committee will return at its next meeting on 16 May. Thank you. Item 6. Can we have a clarification on the funding for the £2.5 million allocation that the Welsh Government has set aside for the roll-out of the childcare offer to disadvantaged families? Is it clear how this funding will be allocated, and how we can expect it to be used? Chair, would you be able to provide an answer? I've asked the committee to note it, but we need clarity on that point. And I think we also need some time for members to ask questions and clarify any confusion about the funding, and there's an understanding that the committee is here to listen, but not to provide advice. So, if possible, Chair, could you provide an answer and an outline of how this funding will be allocated? I am particularly interested in understanding how this funding is set up and used, given that the Welsh Government has, in its budget, allocated an amount of £2.5 million for this initiative. Lynne Neagle AM: I'm afraid I don't have the clarity on that, so I can only tell you that there will be further clarification, if it's necessary, during the committee's next meeting.

[QUESTION]
In which pilot areas was a 30-hour childcare offer implemented as part of the pilot, as described by Owain Lloyd? And what were the other areas that had 30 hours of childcare? Chair, would you be able to provide an answer to the first question?
Huw Irranca-Davies AM: Ah, yes. As I mentioned earlier, we had the following pilot areas: Caernarfonshire, Blaenau Gwent, Cynon Valley, Powys, Gwynedd and Newport. We're actually in the final stage now of our roll-out in some areas, including Caernarfonshire and Newport, and there are also other pilot areas in Cynon Valley, Powys and Gwynedd that are nearing completion.

[QUESTION]
How does the Welsh Government plan to ensure that childcare providers are able to maintain their qualifications and training and meet the requirements of the childcare offer, which includes requirements for qualifications and registration? Chair, can you tell us