(Answer below) 

[ANSWER]
Grad F said that his proposal was {disfmarker} that he would first train a speech recognition system on Macrophone and then test it on noisy TI digits, and if it was {disfmarker} not helpful, then he would try a different approach.

Grad F said that his plan is to improve the quality of the speech recognition system by combining different approaches.

Grad F's main goals for his proposal are to: 

1. Improve the performance of the speech recognition system
2. Use different methods to find bugs and improve the system

Grad F's plan includes:

1. Creating a new speech recognition system by combining different methods, such as VAD, Wiener filter, and cepstral domain normalization
2. Applying this new system to the same noisy TI digits data set as before
3. If the new system doesn't work as well as the old one, Grad F will try a different approach to identify and fix the bugs

Grad F's plan includes:

1. Creating a new speech recognition system that is more robust and less prone to errors
2. Using different methods to improve the system, such as VAD, Wiener filter, and cepstral domain normalization
3. If the system doesn't improve, Grad F will try a different approach to identify and fix the bugs

Grad F's plan is to "smooth the current estimate of the clean speech" using a filter, and also to "smooth the SNR estimate" using the same filter.

The system's performance is determined by its ability to "estimate the noise" in the speech, which is "very low" in the beginning and "increasing" over time.

Grad F's plan includes creating a new subspace representation of the signal, using the cepstral domain.

Grad F is concerned that the current subspace representation is "too complex" and may not be suitable for this particular task.

Grad F plans to use different normalization techniques for different parts of the system, including the VTS (Vocal Treatments System), and the cepstral domain.

Grad F is still uncertain about whether the new system will be more effective than the old one.

Grad F is not sure when to expect results from his experiment, but hopes to see progress soon.

Grad F is open to feedback and willing to modify his approach as needed to improve the system's performance.

Grad F plans to continue working on the cepstral domain representation of the signal and its corresponding filter bank representation.

The next step in the system is to apply