and the recognition recognition system.
Grad E:
So we are taking an audio file and we need to transcribe it, and then we need to run it through this recognition system. For that we are taking an audio file and we need to take a small segment of it, like 1-2 minutes, and we then run it through the recognition system which should provide a transcription. This system should be able to recognize the speaker and the transcript should be accurate. This recognition system is based on the acoustic model of a person and it requires some preprocessing steps, such as filtering, de-noising, and phonetic transcription, which should be performed. This preprocessed audio file should be cleaned up, normalized, and segmented, and then it will be fed into the recognition system for transcription. We can also get this recognition system to work in real-time with the audio file or it can be used as a pre-recorded file. We have a pre-existing system for transcription that we are using for Switchboard, and that will work if we get our new microphone data and if the recognition system is functional. Our goal is to get the best possible recognition of the speaker and the transcript and we are trying to do that with this pre-existing system and with the new microphone data. We are getting more microphones to test, and we will continue to collect more data for the new microphone data, and we will try to get the best possible recognition for the new microphone data.
Grad F:
Well, we got a lot of information about the recognition system and the new microphone data, so let me summarize it for you. We are taking an audio file and we need to transcribe it, and then we need to run it through the recognition system, which should provide a transcription. This system should be able to recognize the speaker and the transcript should be accurate. This recognition system is based on the acoustic model of a person and it requires some preprocessing steps, such as filtering, de-noising, and phonetic transcription. We need to take a small segment of the audio file, like 1-2 minutes, and feed it into the recognition system for transcription. We can also get this recognition system to work in real-time with the audio file or it can be used as a pre-recorded file. We have a pre-existing system for transcription that we are using for Switchboard, and that will work if we get our new microphone data and if the recognition system is functional. We are getting more microphones to test, and we will continue to collect more data