(Lynne Neagle)
What did Nicola Edwards express about the economic impact of the pandemic on the childcare sector in Wales? (Nicola Edwards)
Was the Welsh Government going to make any grants for the childcare sector in Wales? (Nicola Edwards)
What was the role of the Welsh Government in devising the children's rights impact assessments? (Nicola Edwards)
Would the Welsh Government agree that the childcare sector will have a long-term structural issue if there's no more funding available? (Nicola Edwards)
What was the expected outcome of the childcare sector survey, with regards to the number of children accessing the coronavirus childcare assistance scheme? (Nicola Edwards)
What was the intended mechanism for providing support to vulnerable children? (Nicola Edwards)
What was the role of the Welsh Government in devising the children's rights impact assessments, and would it be ongoing? (Nicola Edwards)
How do the Welsh Government ensure that children have access to technology for maintaining contact with their social workers and other support workers and networks? (Nicola Edwards)
Were the childcare providers that are falling between the cracks in the childcare sector still receiving financial support? (Nicola Edwards)
What was the expected outcome of the childcare sector survey, with regards to the number of children accessing the coronavirus childcare assistance scheme? (Nicola Edwards)
Did the Welsh Government have a comprehensive plan for how childcare providers would recover from the economic impact of the pandemic? (Nicola Edwards)

[QUESTION]
Can the Welsh Government provide financial support for all families, including children with a special educational need? (Sian Gwenllian)
Was there a significant increase in the number of children who reported being reluctant to seek help from the health service during the lockdown? (Suzy Davies)
Would you like the Welsh Government to provide funding for the creation of additional healthcare workers? (Suzy Davies)
What are the key indicators for assessing the effectiveness of the measures being taken in Wales to support vulnerable children during the lockdown? (Suzy Davies)
How will the Welsh Government support the most vulnerable children, such as those with a disability or in foster care, during the lockdown? (Suzy Davies)

[QUESTION]
Can the Welsh Government support the families of children who have left foster care to find new placements? (Suzy Davies)
What are the steps that the Welsh Government will take to maintain support for the most vulnerable children, such as those who are carers or those who have experienced trauma during the lockdown? (Suzy Davies)

[QUESTION]
Can the Welsh Government provide financial support for